INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS ORGANIZATION (ISO) 7-LAYER MODEL

	INTRODUCTION

Network industry uses two types of standards:
	de facto standards 
	de jure standards

	1. de facto standards

proprietary
arises through commercial and educational uses.
The standards remain unpublished and unavailable to outside vendors.

	2. de jure standards

non-proprietary
No single company creates or owns them.
Developed with the intent of enhancing connectivity and interoperability.
Specifications are made public.

Development and implementation of de jure standards are regulated by standards organization.

OSI(Open Systems Interconnection) model: Communication standard through which computer networks will be designed.

Is an accepted framework for analyzing and developing networking components and functionality.

	Rules of the communication process

Procedures governed by network standards:
1. Procedures used to communicate the est and ending of communication.
2. Signals used to represent data on the transmission media.
3. Types of signals to be used.
4. Access methods for relaying a signal across the media.
5. Methods used to direct a message to the intended destination
6. Procedures used to control the rate of data flow.
7. Methods used to enable different computer types to communicate
8. Ways to ensure that messages are received correctly.

	THE OSI REFERENCE MODEL

Provides useful structure for defining and describing the various processes underlying networking communications.
Is a blueprint for vendors to follow when developing implementations.

		Application
		Presentation
		Session
		Transport
		Network
		Data Link
		Physical

Headers are added to info sent between the layers.
In the receiver, the headers are removed(stripped) by the receiving computer after info in header has been utilized.
headers are removed in the reverse order in which they were added.

Information between computers is passed vertically.
It is also horizontal in that one computer talks to its respective layer in the other computer.

	PHYSICAL LAYER CONCEPTS

Concerned with all aspects of transmiting and receiving data on the network media.
Transmitting and receiving bits.

Defines key x-tics of the physical network:
	Physical structure of the network (physical topology)
	Mechanical and electrical specifications for using the medium
	Bit transmission, encoding, timing


These specifications differ depending on the physical medium.

	COMPONENTS:

Repeaters: repeats a signal from one port onto other ports to which it is connected.
Used to extend the distance between the network stations.


	DATA LINK LAYER CONCEPTS

Receives messages, called frames from upper layers.
It disassembles frames into bits for transmission.
It also reconstructs frames from bits received.

Other fns:
-error control
-flow control

IEEE 802 standard divides the Data Link layer into two sublayers:
	-Media Access Control(MAC) Controls how data is transferred from a device to transmission medium. Also provides addressing information for communication btn network devices.
	-Logical Link Control(LLC) establishes and maintains links btn communicating devices.

Flow control: Determines the amount of data that can be transmitted in a given time.
Error control: Detects errors in received frames and requests retransmission of frames.

	COMPONENTS:

Bridges:
Datalink layer enables a bridge to pass a frame in the direction of its destination without simultaneously forwarding it to segments for which it was not intended.
Filtering reduces traffic.


	NETWORK LAYER CONCEPTS

Handles communication with devices on logically separate networks that are connected to form internetworks.
Utilizes routing algorithms that guide packets from their source to their destination networks.
Each network is assigned a network address used to router packets.
Network layer manages the process of addressing and delivering packets on internetworks.

It oversees the process of determining paths and delivering packets across the internetwork.

Switching techniques are mechanisms for moving data from one network segment to another.

	SWITCHING TECHNIQUES::

1. Circuit switching
2. Message switching
3. Packet switching


	Circuit switching

Establishes a path that remains fixed for the duration of a connection.
Provides devices with a dedicated path and a well defined bandwidth.

DISADVANTAGES

Establishing a connection between the devices can be time consuming.
Other traffic cannot share the dedicated media path, bandwidth may be used inefficiently.
Must have surplus of bandwidths hence expensive to contruct.

	Message switching

Treats each message as an independent entity.
Each message carries address information that describes the message's destination, this info is used at each switch to transfer the message to the next switch in the route.
Message switching transfers the complete message from one switch to another, where the message is stored before it is forwarded again( store and forward network)
The switches are general purpose computers with sufficient storage and RAM.

ADVANTAGES

Data channels are shared between communicating devices, hence efficiency in bandwidth utilization.
Stores messages until a channel becomes available, reducing sensitivity to network congestion.
Message priorities can be used to manage network traffic.
Broadcast addressing uses network bandwidth more efficiently by delivering messages to multiple destinations.

DISADVANTAGE

Not suited for real-time applications, including data communication, video, and audio.


	Packet switching

Messages are divided into smaller pieces called packets.
Each packet includes source and destination address information so that individual packets can be routed through the internetwork independently.
Looks like message switching but packets are restricted to a size that enables the switching devices to manage packet data entirely in memory. This eliminates the need for switching devices to store the data temporarily in disk.
Hence routes packets more rapidly and efficiently than message switching.

	Methods of packet switching:
	-Datagram
	-Virtual circuit


	Virtual Circuit Packet Switching

A formal connection is established between two devices.
The devices negotiate communication parameters:
  -max message size
  -communication windows
  -network paths

The negotiation establishes a virtual circuit, which is a well-defined path through the internetwork by which devices communicate.
The virtual circuit remains until devices stop communicating.

	ADVANTAGES OF PACKET SWITCHING

Optimizes use of bandwidth; same network channel is used by multiple devices. The router adjusts routes for maximum efficiency.

Entire messages are not stored in switches prior to forwarding, hence transmission delays are shorter.

	DISADVANTAGES

Needs significant amount of real-time memory.
Switching devices must have sufficient processing power to run more complex routing protocols.
A system must be in place in which devices can recognize when packets have been lost so that retransmission can be requested.


	CONNECTION-ORIENTED AND CONNECTIONLESS MODES

Complexity and versatility of Network layer gives rise to two communication modes:

	-Connection-oriented mode
	-Connectionless mode

Connection-oriented mode: Error correction and flow control are provided at internal nodes along the message path.

Connectionless mode: Internal nodes along the path do not participate in error correction and flow control.

	ADVANTAGE OF CONNECTIONLESS MODE

Communication can be processed more quickly and simply; internal nodes just foward data.

	DISADVANTAGES

Messages may get lost due to overflowing buffer:

If a message get's lost, the sender doesn't receive notification.
Retransmission for error correction takes longer because a faulty transmission can't be corrected across an internal link.

	GATEWAY SERVICES

Routers can handle interconnection of networks whose protocols function in similar ways.

When the rules differ a gateway is required.
Gateway: is device that can translate different protocols used by different networks.

brouter: is adevice that combines some xtics of a router and a bridge.
It acts as a router for routerable protocols and acts as a bridge for nonroutable protocols.


	TRANSPORT LAYER CONCEPTS

Implement's procedures to ensure reliable delivery of messages to their destination devices.

"reliable" does not mean that errors cannot occur ; it means that if errors occur, they are detected.

it either requests retransmission or notifies upper-layer protocols so that they can take corrective action.
Transport layer breaks large messages into segments suitable for network delivery.

	Transport Layer Connection Services

Transport layer interacts with the Network layer's connection-oriented and connectionless services and provides some of the essential quality control features.

	Transport Layer activities:

Repackaging: Repackages the segments when received b4 reassembling the original message.

Error control: When segments are lost, when they have duplicate segment IDs, error recovery will be initiated.
Also detectes corrupted segments using checksums.

End-to-end flow control: uses acknowledgments to manage end-to-end flow. They can also request retransmission of the most recent segments.


	SESSION LAYER CONCEPTS

Manages dialogs between two computers by establishing, managing and terminating communications.
Dialogs takes 3 forms:

1. Simplex dialogs:

Responsible for one-way data transfers only.

2. Half-duplex dialogs:

Handles two data transfers in which data only flows in one direction at a time.

3. Full-duplex dialogs:

Permits two-way simultaneous data transfers; each device is provided with a separate communication channel.

	Session Layer Session Administration

A session is a formal dialog between a service requester and a service provider.

Sessions have four phases:

	1.Connection establishment:
Service requester requests initiation of a service.Communication is established and rules agreed upon.

	2.Data transfer:
With all the rules agreed upon, each party knows what to expect. Communicatin is therefore efficient and errors are easy to detect.

	3.Connection release:
When session is completed, the dialog is terminated in an orderly fashion.

	4.Error correction:
Done at the session layer. Checks for errors in the reassembled packets received from the Transport layer.

Connection establishment phase is comprised of several tasks:

1. Specification of required services to be used.
2. User login authentication and other security procedures
3. Negotitation of protocols and protocol parameters.
4. Notification of connection IDs.
5. Establishment of dialog control, acknowledgement of numbering and retransmission procedures.

The session layer also incoporotes protocols to resume dialogs that have been interrupted.


	PRESENTATION LAYER CONCEPTS

Formats the data to be presented to the application layer.
Is a translator of the network.
Translates data from a format used by application layer into a common format at the sending station, then translates the common format to a format known to the application layer at the receving station.

It provides:

1. Character code translation e.g., ASCII to EBCDIC
2. Data conversion: bit order, integer-floating point etc.
3. Data compression: reduces number of bits that need to be transmitted on the network.
4. Data encryption: encrypt data for security purposes. e.g., password encryption.


On the receiving end, Presentation layer converts machine independent data from the network into the format required for the local system.
Conversion includes:

	1. Bit order translation
Binary numbers transmitted through a network are sent one bit at a time.
Transmitting computer can either start at MSD or LSD.
This has to do with whether the information read is from right to left or from left to right.

	2. Byte-order translation
Needed to reconcile differences when transferring data between a computer with Intel processor (begins transmission with least significant byte; "little endian) and Motorola (begins with most significant byte; "big endian")

	3. Character code translation

	4. File syntax translation
File formats are different between computers.

	5. Encryption
Puts data into a form unreadable by unauthorized users.
Takes on two main forms:
	-Public key
	Uses a rule of encryption(the key) and a known value.
	Manipulation of the key with a known value produces a mechanism for decrypting data.

	-Private key
	Uses one key. All component that have the key can decrypt the data.


	APPLICATION LAYER CONCEPTS

Concerned with providing services on the network including file sevices, print services, application services such as database services, messaging services and directory services among others.

Provides an interface whereby application can communicate with the network.

It is the interface that is often referred to as the Application Programming Interface(API).

It also advertises the available services your computer has to the network.

It serves as a window for users and application processes to access network services

	Commonly needed functions:

1. Resource sharing and device redirection
2. Remote file access
3. Remote printer access
4. Inter-process communication
5. Network management
6. Directory services
7. Electronic messaging (such as mail)
8. Network virtual terminals


	Ethernet

Is a computer networking technology for LANs.
Has wiring and signaling variants
Wiring variants:
	-coaxial cable
	-twisted pair
	-fiber optic

Signaling variants:
	-10BASE-T  (10Mbit/s)
	-100BASE-TX(100Mbit/s)
	-1000BASE-T(1Gbit/s)

The 3 above utilizes twisted pair cables.

Fibre optic offers high performance, electrical isolation and distance.


	Token ring

Is a protocol residing in the data link layer.
Uses a 3-byte frame called a token ring that travels around the ring.

	Data transmission process:
1. Empty info frames are continuosly circulated on the ring.
2. When a computer has a message to send, it seizes the token. The computer will then send the frame.
3. The frame is examined by each successive workstation. A workstation identifies itself to be the destination; copies the message from the frame and changes the token back to zero.
4. The token goes back to the originator; it sees that it has changed to 0 and what message has been copied and received. It removes the message from the frame.
5. The frame continues to circulate as an empty frame, ready to be taken by a workstation when it has a message to send.

	
	Fiber Distributed Data Interface (FDDI)

Is a standard for data transmission in LAN.
Uses optical fibre as its standard underlying physical medium.
